Chicago Tribune
Dec. 12, 1928

ARGENTINA NIPS ANARCHIST PLOT TO KILL HOOVER
-----
Seize Conspirators and Bombs.
-----
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina, Dec. 11.--(AP)--An anarchist plot to kill Herbert Hoover, American President Elect, on his arrival here Thursday, has been discovered and frustrated by the Argentine police, it became known here today.
The conspirators, two of whom have been arrested, had planned to place bombs on the railway tracks just before the arrival of the Hoover special train.
President Irigoyen issued this statement tonight:
"The president of the republic, being desirous of making agreeable the visit of the President Elect of the United States of America and of offering the greatest possible guarantee of safety to the personnel of the illustrious visitor, commanded the police to intensify their observation of dangerous anarchist elements.
Raiders Seize Bombs.
"This order was carried out by the division of investigation which, after discreet inquiries and investigations, this morning searched a house in Estomba street in which were found four hand grenades, two cylindrical bombs, one square bomb, dynamite, revolvers, automatic pistols, quantities of ammunition, and 150 ten peso notes--all of which have been placed at the disposition of judicial authorities."
The police said that a room in the raided house contained a detailed map of the railway system which apparently was used by the plotters in planning their attack.
It was announced tonight that 1.500 guards had been employed on special duty to insure the safety of Mr. Hoover during his visit.
Other details obtained from the police indicate that the conspirators intended to place bombs on the railway tracks somewhere near the outskirts of the city.
Youth Under Arrest.
A youth arrested in the raided house gave his name as Carlos Gutierrez, age 18 years. The police declared that his real name was Alejandro Romano and that he was 21, but posed as younger in the hope of obtaining leniency. He is said to be a student of chemistry and was believed to have manufactured the bombs.
A second man arrested tonight near the house gave the name of Jaime Oliver. The police said his real name is Jaime Castro and that he is a chauffeur.
For several days the police have been active in rounding up persons active in previous agitations against the United States, notably bombings and demonstrations, growing out of the Sacco-Vanzetti executions and Nicaraguan intervention.
All suspects will be confined until after the departure of Mr. Hoover. The authorities are determined to prevent any public demonstration against the United States.
Bombers Active for Year.
Since the bombing of the National City bank on Christmas eve, 1927, when two persons were killed and twenty injured, the police have not relaxed their vigilance in guarding the United States embassy and consulate, the American club and buildings housing prominent American firms. Last month a bomb was discovered by the police on the steps of the Buenos Aires cathedral, which is across the street from the National City bank. As it was being removed to the station house it exploded, killing a pedestrian.
This was also believed to be part of a general agitation program against American interests in Argentina, but the perpetrators were never apprehended.