In Talbot county, Eastern Shore, Maryland, near Easton, the county town
of that county, there is a small district of country, thinly populated,
and remarkable for nothing that I know of more than for the worn-out,
sandy, desert-like appearance of its soil, the general dilapidation
of its farms and fences, the indigent and spiritless character of its
inhabitants, and the prevalence of ague and fever.

The name of this singularly unpromising and truly famine stricken
district is Tuckahoe, a name well known to all Marylanders, black and
white. It was given to this section of country probably, at the first,
merely in derision; or it may possibly have been applied to it, as I
have heard, because some one of its earlier inhabitants had been guilty
of the petty meanness of stealing a hoe--or taking a hoe that did not
belong to him. Eastern Shore men usually pronounce the word _took_, as
_tuck; Took-a-hoe_, therefore, is, in Maryland parlance, _Tuckahoe_.
But, whatever may have been its origin--and about this I will not be
{26} positive--that name has stuck to the district in question; and it
is seldom mentioned but with contempt and derision, on account of the
barrenness of its soil, and the ignorance, indolence, and poverty of its
people. Decay and ruin are everywhere visible, and the thin population
of the place would have quitted it long ago, but for the Choptank
river, which runs through it, from which they take abundance of shad and
herring, and plenty of ague and fever.

It was in this dull, flat, and unthrifty district, or neighborhood,
surrounded by a white population of the lowest order, indolent and
drunken to a proverb, and among slaves, who seemed to ask, _"Oh! what's
the use?"_ every time they lifted a hoe, that I--without any fault of
mine was born, and spent the first years of my childhood.

The reader will pardon so much about the place of my birth, on the score
that it is always a fact of some importance to know where a man is born,
if, indeed, it be important to know anything about him. In regard to the
_time_ of my birth, I cannot be as definite as I have been respecting
the _place_. Nor, indeed, can I impart much knowledge concerning my
parents. Genealogical trees do not flourish among slaves. A person of
some consequence here in the north, sometimes designated _father_, is
literally abolished in slave law and slave practice. It is only once in
a while that an exception is found to this statement. I never met with a
slave who could tell me how old he was. Few slave-mothers know anything
of the months of the year, nor of the days of the month. They keep no
family records, with marriages, births, and deaths. They measure the
ages of their children by spring time, winter time, harvest time,
planting time, and the like; but these soon become undistinguishable
and forgotten. Like other slaves, I cannot tell how old I am. This
destitution was among my earliest troubles. I learned when I grew up,
that my master--and this is the case with masters generally--allowed
no questions to be put to him, by which a slave might learn his{27
GRANDPARENTS} age. Such questions deemed evidence of impatience, and
even of impudent curiosity. From certain events, however, the dates of
which I have since learned, I suppose myself to have been born about the
year 1817.

The first experience of life with me that I now remember--and I remember
it but hazily--began in the family of my grandmother and grandfather.
Betsey and Isaac Baily. They were quite advanced in life, and had long
lived on the spot where they then resided. They were considered old
settlers in the neighborhood, and, from certain circumstances, I infer
that my grandmother, especially, was held in high esteem, far higher
than is the lot of most colored persons in the slave states. She was
a good nurse, and a capital hand at making nets for catching shad and
herring; and these nets were in great demand, not only in Tuckahoe, but
at Denton and Hillsboro, neighboring villages. She was not only good at
making the nets, but was also somewhat famous for her good fortune in
taking the fishes referred to. I have known her to be in the water
half the day. Grandmother was likewise more provident than most of
her neighbors in the preservation of seedling sweet potatoes, and it
happened to her--as it will happen to any careful and thrifty person
residing in an ignorant and improvident community--to enjoy the
reputation of having been born to "good luck." Her "good luck" was owing
to the exceeding care which she took in preventing the succulent root
from getting bruised in the digging, and in placing it beyond the reach
of frost, by actually burying it under the hearth of her cabin during
the winter months. In the time of planting sweet potatoes, "Grandmother
Betty," as she was familiarly called, was sent for in all directions,
simply to place the seedling potatoes in the hills; for superstition had
it, that if "Grandmamma Betty but touches them at planting, they will be
sure to grow and flourish." This high reputation was full of advantage
to her, and to the children around her. Though Tuckahoe had but few of
the good things of{28} life, yet of such as it did possess grandmother
got a full share, in the way of presents. If good potato crops came
after her planting, she was not forgotten by those for whom she planted;
and as she was remembered by others, so she remembered the hungry little
ones around her.

The dwelling of my grandmother and grandfather had few pretensions. It
was a log hut, or cabin, built of clay, wood, and straw. At a
distance it resembled--though it was smaller, less commodious and less
substantial--the cabins erected in the western states by the first
settlers. To my child's eye, however, it was a noble structure,
admirably adapted to promote the comforts and conveniences of its
inmates. A few rough, Virginia fence-rails, flung loosely over the
rafters above, answered the triple purpose of floors, ceilings, and
bedsteads. To be sure, this upper apartment was reached only by a
ladder--but what in the world for climbing could be better than a
ladder? To me, this ladder was really a high invention, and possessed
a sort of charm as I played with delight upon the rounds of it. In this
little hut there was a large family of children: I dare not say how
many. My grandmother--whether because too old for field service, or
because she had so faithfully discharged the duties of her station in
early life, I know not--enjoyed the high privilege of living in a cabin,
separate from the quarter, with no other burden than her own support,
and the necessary care of the little children, imposed. She evidently
esteemed it a great fortune to live so. The children were not her own,
but her grandchildren--the children of her daughters. She took delight
in having them around her, and in attending to their few wants. The
practice of separating children from their mother, and hiring the latter
out at distances too great to admit of their meeting, except at long
intervals, is a marked feature of the cruelty and barbarity of the
slave system. But it is in harmony with the grand aim of slavery, which,
always and everywhere, is to reduce man to a level with the brute. It is
a successful method of obliterating{29 "OLD MASTER"} from the mind and
heart of the slave, all just ideas of the sacredness of _the family_, as
an institution.

Most of the children, however, in this instance, being the children of
my grandmother's daughters, the notions of family, and the reciprocal
duties and benefits of the relation, had a better chance of being
understood than where children are placed--as they often are in the
hands of strangers, who have no care for them, apart from the wishes
of their masters. The daughters of my grandmother were five in number.
Their names were JENNY, ESTHER, MILLY, PRISCILLA, and HARRIET. The
daughter last named was my mother, of whom the reader shall learn more
by-and-by.

Living here, with my dear old grandmother and grandfather, it was a
long time before I knew myself to be _a slave_. I knew many other things
before I knew that. Grandmother and grandfather were the greatest people
in the world to me; and being with them so snugly in their own little
cabin--I supposed it be their own--knowing no higher authority over me
or the other children than the authority of grandmamma, for a time there
was nothing to disturb me; but, as I grew larger and older, I learned
by degrees the sad fact, that the "little hut," and the lot on which it
stood, belonged not to my dear old grandparents, but to some person who
lived a great distance off, and who was called, by grandmother, "OLD
MASTER." I further learned the sadder fact, that not only the house and
lot, but that grandmother herself, (grandfather was free,) and all
the little children around her, belonged to this mysterious personage,
called by grandmother, with every mark of reverence, "Old Master." Thus
early did clouds and shadows begin to fall upon my path. Once on the
track--troubles never come singly--I was not long in finding out another
fact, still more grievous to my childish heart. I was told that this
"old master," whose name seemed ever to be mentioned with fear and
shuddering, only allowed the children to live with grandmother for a
limited time, and that in fact as soon{30} as they were big enough, they
were promptly taken away, to live with the said "old master." These
were distressing revelations indeed; and though I was quite too young
to comprehend the full import of the intelligence, and mostly spent my
childhood days in gleesome sports with the other children, a shade of
disquiet rested upon me.

The absolute power of this distant "old master" had touched my young
spirit with but the point of its cold, cruel iron, and left me something
to brood over after the play and in moments of repose. Grandmammy was,
indeed, at that time, all the world to me; and the thought of being
separated from her, in any considerable time, was more than an unwelcome
intruder. It was intolerable.

Children have their sorrows as well as men and women; and it would be
well to remember this in our dealings with them. SLAVE-children _are_
children, and prove no exceptions to the general rule. The liability
to be separated from my grandmother, seldom or never to see her again,
haunted me. I dreaded the thought of going to live with that mysterious
"old master," whose name I never heard mentioned with affection, but
always with fear. I look back to this as among the heaviest of my
childhood's sorrows. My grandmother! my grandmother! and the little hut,
and the joyous circle under her care, but especially _she_, who made
us sorry when she left us but for an hour, and glad on her return,--how
could I leave her and the good old home?

But the sorrows of childhood, like the pleasures of after life,
are transient. It is not even within the power of slavery to write
_indelible_ sorrow, at a single dash, over the heart of a child.

                _The tear down childhood's cheek that flows,
                Is like the dew-drop on the rose--
                When next the summer breeze comes by,
                And waves the bush--the flower is dry_.


There is, after all, but little difference in the measure of contentment
felt by the slave-child neglected and the slaveholder's{31 COMPARATIVE
HAPPINESS} child cared for and petted. The spirit of the All Just
mercifully holds the balance for the young.

The slaveholder, having nothing to fear from impotent childhood, easily
affords to refrain from cruel inflictions; and if cold and hunger do
not pierce the tender frame, the first seven or eight years of the
slave-boy's life are about as full of sweet content as those of the most
favored and petted _white_ children of the slaveholder. The slave-boy
escapes many troubles which befall and vex his white brother. He seldom
has to listen to lectures on propriety of behavior, or on anything else.
He is never chided for handling his little knife and fork improperly
or awkwardly, for he uses none. He is never reprimanded for soiling the
table-cloth, for he takes his meals on the clay floor. He never has the
misfortune, in his games or sports, of soiling or tearing his clothes,
for he has almost none to soil or tear. He is never expected to act like
a nice little gentleman, for he is only a rude little slave. Thus, freed
from all restraint, the slave-boy can be, in his life and conduct, a
genuine boy, doing whatever his boyish nature suggests; enacting, by
turns, all the strange antics and freaks of horses, dogs, pigs, and
barn-door fowls, without in any manner compromising his dignity, or
incurring reproach of any sort. He literally runs wild; has no pretty
little verses to learn in the nursery; no nice little speeches to make
for aunts, uncles, or cousins, to show how smart he is; and, if he can
only manage to keep out of the way of the heavy feet and fists of the
older slave boys, he may trot on, in his joyous and roguish tricks, as
happy as any little heathen under the palm trees of Africa. To be
sure, he is occasionally reminded, when he stumbles in the path of his
master--and this he early learns to avoid--that he is eating his _"white
bread,"_ and that he will be made to _"see sights"_ by-and-by. The
threat is soon forgotten; the shadow soon passes, and our sable boy
continues to roll in the dust, or play in the mud, as bests suits him,
and in the veriest freedom. If he feels uncomfortable, from mud or from
dust, the coast is clear; he can plunge into{32} the river or the pond,
without the ceremony of undressing, or the fear of wetting his clothes;
his little tow-linen shirt--for that is all he has on--is easily dried;
and it needed ablution as much as did his skin. His food is of the
coarsest kind, consisting for the most part of cornmeal mush, which
often finds it way from the wooden tray to his mouth in an oyster shell.
His days, when the weather is warm, are spent in the pure, open air, and
in the bright sunshine. He always sleeps in airy apartments; he seldom
has to take powders, or to be paid to swallow pretty little sugar-coated
pills, to cleanse his blood, or to quicken his appetite. He eats no
candies; gets no lumps of loaf sugar; always relishes his food; cries
but little, for nobody cares for his crying; learns to esteem his
bruises but slight, because others so esteem them. In a word, he is, for
the most part of the first eight years of his life, a spirited, joyous,
uproarious, and happy boy, upon whom troubles fall only like water on a
duck's back. And such a boy, so far as I can now remember, was the boy
whose life in slavery I am now narrating.